feat: default value for parameterConsistency (#929)
substrait-io/substrait: site/docs/expressions/scalar_functions.md

### Parameterized Types

Types are parameterized by two types of values: by inner types (e.g. `List<K>`) and numeric values (e.g. `DECIMAL<P,S>`). Parameter names are simple strings (frequently a single character). There are two types of parameters: integer parameters and type parameters.

When the same parameter name is used multiple times in a function definition, the function can only bind if the exact same value is used for all parameters of that name. For example, if one had a function with a signature of `fn(VARCHAR<N>, VARCHAR<N>)`, the function would be only be usable if both `VARCHAR` types had the same length value `N`. This necessitates that all instances of the same parameter name must be of the same parameter type (all instances are a type parameter or all instances are an integer parameter).

#### Type Parameter Resolution in Variadic Functions

Two types have the same *base type* if they are identical modulo their outermost nullability. For example, `i32` and `i32?` have the same base type, but `list<i32>` and `list<i32?>` do not.

> When the last argument of a function is variadic and declares a type parameter e.g. `fn(A, B, C...)`, the `C` parameter can be marked as either consistent or inconsistent. If marked as consistent, the function can only be bound to arguments where all the `C` types have the same base type. If marked as inconsistent, each unique `C` can be bound to a different type within the type parameter's constraints. Nullability follows the [nullability handling](#nullability-handling) option. The default behavior is `CONSISTENT`.

Reviewer: > The default behavior is `CONSISTENT`.

We probably should set a `default: CONSISTENT` in the extension schema mirroring this spec clarification:
https://github.com/substrait-io/substrait/blob/de9e6328f4f94abc0809977f57dfde7262a7258b/text/simple_extensions_schema.yaml#L176-L178

Reviewer: Should we also cleanup function definitions that clearly should be marked `INCONSISTENT` like `concat:vchar`? We then would also need a way in the return type expression language to operate over the list of type parameters in order to allow something like `max(L1)` or `sum(L1)` for a `varchar<L1>` argument.

> Two types have the same *base type* if they are identical modulo their outermost nullability. For example, `i32` and `i32?` have the same base type, but `list<i32>` and `list<i32?>` do not.
> 
> When the last argument of a function is variadic and declares a type parameter e.g. `fn(A, B, C...)`, the `C` parameter can be marked as either consistent or inconsistent. If marked as consistent, the function can only be bound to arguments where all the `C` types have the same base type. If marked as inconsistent, each unique `C` can be bound to a different type within the type parameter's constraints. Nullability follows the [nullability handling](#nullability-handling) option. The default behavior is `CONSISTENT`.

Reviewer: This restates the rule #960 landed on main: "All type components except the outermost nullability must match structurally" (L111), whose binding tables already use this same `i32`/`i32?` vs `list<i32>`/`list<i32?>` pair (L138-139). After a rebase it's a second name for an existing rule.

Worth cross-referencing rather than dropping outright, though, because it's a different comparison than #960's — that one binds a declared `any` against one concrete argument, this one compares arguments to each other across repetitions. And unqualified it reads against the `DISCRETE` bullet (L114): there each argument's outermost nullability must match the declaration at its position, and a variadic argument has exactly one declared position, so nullability is already uniform and the relaxation is a no-op. "Nullability follows the nullability handling option" is carrying that caveat implicitly.

```suggestion
When the last argument of a function is variadic and declares a type parameter e.g. `fn(A, B, C...)`, the `C` parameter can be marked as either consistent or inconsistent. If marked as consistent, the function can only be bound to arguments where all the `C` types bind to the same type, with outermost nullability treated as described in [Nullability and `any` Type Binding](#nullability-and-any-type-binding). If marked as inconsistent, each unique `C` can be bound to a different type within the type parameter's constraints. The default behavior is `CONSISTENT`.
```

Same wording change applies to "all variadic arguments must resolve to the same base type" below.

🤖 This comment was assisted by AI.

--8<-- "examples/extensions/variadic_complex_type_example.yaml"
```
When the variadic argument contains a type parameter like `any1`, all occurrences of `any1` within each argument must still match (as described above). In the `all_pairs_equal` function above, each `struct<any1, any1>` must have both fields be the same type (e.g., `struct<i32, i32>` is valid, but `struct<i32, string>` is not). With `CONSISTENT`, all variadic arguments must also use the same `any1` binding. For example, `all_pairs_equal({1, 2}, {3, 4})` is valid because all pairs are `struct<i32, i32>`, but `all_pairs_equal({1, 2}, {'a', 'b'})` would be invalid because the pairs use different types.

```yaml
--8<-- "examples/extensions/variadic_complex_inconsistent_example.yaml"
```
With `INCONSISTENT`, each variadic argument can use a different `any1` binding, while still requiring `any1` to be consistent within each argument. In the `count_pairs` function above, `count_pairs({1, 2}, {'a', 'b'})` is valid because the first pair is `struct<i32, i32>` and the second is `struct<string, string>`. However, `count_pairs({1, 'a'})` would still be invalid because within a single pair, both fields must match.

!!! note

>     The `parameterConsistency` field only has an effect when the variadic argument contains a type parameter (like `any1`, `T`, etc.). For concrete types (like `boolean?`, `i32`, `string`), it has no effect. Additionally, if the type parameter appears in non-variadic positions (such as the return type), those occurrences pin the parameter and all variadic arguments must match that type regardless of the `parameterConsistency` setting. When the variadic argument does contain a type parameter, it is recommended that extension authors explicitly specify `parameterConsistency` to make the intended behavior clear.

Reviewer: The middle sentence here is the rule that decides every real case in the catalog, and it's sitting in a note as a parenthetical. 

Every parameterized variadic impl in the standard extensions puts the parameter in the return type — `coalesce`, `least`, `least_skip_null`, `greatest`, `greatest_skip_null` as `any1 -> any1`; `concat` and `concat_ws` vchar as `varchar<L1> -> varchar<L1>` — so as written, `parameterConsistency` is inert for all of them, which sits oddly with the next sentence recommending authors set it explicitly.

It also merges two different mechanisms:

- A parameter in a **non-variadic argument** does constrain binding — that argument's concrete
  type fixes it, and the same-name rule above (L82) already covers that.
- A **return type** is derived from the binding, so it can't constrain the input. Treating it as pinning makes the return type an input constraint, which is a new rule rather than a restatement of an existing one.

And implementations don't do this today: substrait-java binds `f(any1...) -> any1` with `INCONSISTENT` and arguments `(i32, string)` to `i32` — first repetition wins — so this would make the entire catalog's current behavior non-conforming.

Suggest promoting it into the body, split into those two cases, and deciding the return-type case explicitly: either `INCONSISTENT` combined with the parameter in the return type is invalid (a rule the schema can carry), or the spec says how the return type derives from the several bindings. As written, the note picks a third answer — constrain the input — without saying what a producer should emit.

🤖 This comment was assisted by AI.
